Module 3 Video 3: Simpson’s Paradox in Data Journalism
[00:00:00] 三つ目はお聞きになったことがあるかもしれません。シンプソンのパラドックスと呼ばれるもので、これは、グループでデータを分割すると、結果が劇的に変わるというものです。 And
this is a real world example of this. We were working in a community that was having a youth 
mental health crisis, and we were asked to help figure out where the mental health crisis was
coming from. Where was the risk? This is an important story for a community that is watching its
young people suffer. So if you take the dataset and you divide it by race, whether the young
person is black or white. You find out that the black youth are at greater risk for a mental health
crisis in this community. I should point out that this data is not generalizable to society as a whole.
[00:01:01] If you take the very same data set and you divide it by sex, male youth and female
youth, we find out that it's the male youth that are the most at risk. If you take the same dataset
and you divide it by whether or not the in-person is currently living in poverty, we find out that is
the young people not living in poverty that are the most at risk. Again, this is not generalizable.
This is in this community only. However, if you take the data and you look at all those aspects of a
young person at the same time. So instead of just breaking out the data by white or black, male
or female, or in poverty or not in poverty, if we do a more complicated three way analysis, we find
out that it's the white males living in poverty who are actually the highest at risk.
[00:02:00] When we looked at it, one by one, it was the black children, the male children and the
children not living in poverty. And then when we make the groups a different way, we find out that
it's white males living in poverty. And what this is called is Simpson's paradox. And it's called a
paradox. Instead of a fallacy, because all of these answers are actually correct. So if we want to
know whether black children or white children are at risk, it's black children. That is the correct
answer is not a fallacy. It's not a mistake. The correct answer is black children. If we want to use a
gender lens and find out if it's male children or female children at risk. It's male children. That's a
correct answer. And if we want to know whether it's children living in poverty or not living in
poverty who are at risk, it's children not living in poverty. That is also a correct answer. And if we
want to look at children with all of these social identities simultaneously. We get a very different
answer, we find out that it's white males living in poverty.
[00:03:07] So all four of these answers are correct, just like in our very first video, whether the
average classroom size is three or four. All of these answers are correct. So it's very important for
you as a data journalist to understand that the way that you choose to group or slice and dice
your data has a very strong influence over the results that you will get. So your assumptions going
into the data analysis, or your priorities going into the data analysis are absolutely going to affect
the results coming out of the data analysis. And that's called Simpson's paradox. 
