Module 3 Video 4: Prosector’s Fallacy in Data Journalism
[00:00:00] 今日お話しする最後の誤謬は「検察官の誤謬」です。「検察官の誤謬」は法廷でもよく出てきますが、データジャーナリズムの観点から見ても、確率の基本を理解し、確率がどのように働くかを理解することは非常に重要です。
 でないと、ストーリーの重要なデータの部分を誤って取得してしまう可能性が高いのです。
[00:00:32] イギリスのサリー・クラークという女性の例をみてみましょう。サリー・クラークは法律家です。 She was married to a lawyer. And she had a son in 1996. And he died very
suddenly at home at eight weeks of age. They did a postmortem. And it wasn't conclusive, but
essentially it looked like he died from natural causes. The next year sally Clark gave birth to
another son and he'd also died very suddenly at home at about age of eight weeks. The
postmortem on Harry was also inconclusive. It's extraordinarily complex to get a solid
determination in many cases of infant death, but they wondered if it was death from shaking. They
thought it was a little bit suspicious. And then they went back and they reexamined the deaths,
the death of Christopher, Sally Clarke's first son. And she was put on trial and charged with the
murder of both of her children.
[00:01:36] Now, what the prosecutor did, and this is why it's called the Prosecutor's Fallacy, is
that the prosecutor got somebody to do the math to try and prove what the odds were for this
happening as a way to get the jury to convict the jury or the judge to convict Sally Clark of murder
because we had no conclusive evidence and there were no conclusive physical evidence. And so
the mathematician that the prosecutor hired said, did some research and found that the odds of a
sudden infant death in a healthy high income family in Britain was one in eight thousand five
hundred. And so this relied on dividing infant death into three different categories. The first
category was natural causes. The second category was murder. And the third category was
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome. So because that's what Sally Clark's defense attorney was
saying, that these were this was sudden infant death syndrome. She had not murdered these
babies. So the prosecutor said the odds of a sudden infant death happening to a healthy income
family is one in eight thousand five hundred. Then that mathematician said the probability of two
infant deaths is the probability of one of those events multiplied by the probability of one of those
events, because there were two. So the probability of two is the probability one times the
probability of one. So if you multiply one in eight thousand five hundred by one in eight thousand
five hundred, you get about one in 73 million. So this is what the prosecutor said. There was a one
in 73 million chance that these deaths were Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and therefore they
should convict Sally Clark. And in fact, they did convict Sally Clark based on this math. And then
what happened was a whole bunch of other mathematicians stepped in and said that is not the
correct math and we have to reopen this trial and think about this again. The reason that this is
not correct, math is based on how probability works.
[00:04:03] So the chance of two sudden infant death syndrome is happening in the same
household. Being one in 73 million. It's a correct nu number. It's a correct calculation, but it's a
correct calculation that answers the incorrect question. The one in 73 million calculation answers
the probability of the evidence. What were the probability that these deaths were SIDS? Given
that she was innocent? So the probability of E. Given I so the probability of the evidence, given
the fact that she was innocent, is what they actually calculated. So the one in 73 million. Is how
likely it is for Sally Clark's, both Sally Clark's babies, to die from SIDS versus to die from other
natural causes, it's not the probability of whether or not it was SIDS or murder. You can see this
from the bar chart we have at the bottom. The chances of it being murder are yellow. The chances
of it being SIDS are maroon. And the chance of it being all their natural causes are gray. And the
prosecutor accidentally compared the chances of it being SIDS to the chances of it being any
other natural cause. What we really need to do, of course. As the prosecutor or to use math to
decide what the probability of this happening, is the probability of her innocence given to infant
deaths of unknown cause. Go back to those slide minutes. I know this can be complicated. One
in 73 million is the probability of E given I. So that's the probability of the evidence given that she
is innocent.
[00:05:59] What we need is the probability of innocence, given the evidence. So the probability of
innocence of Sally Clark, given that there are two infant deaths in her home of unknown causes. 
So the probability of innocence is whether she's an innocent mother or a guilty mother. These two
bars on the left in purple. We want to know whether Sally Clark is innocent or whether she's guilty.
And if she's innocent there's two ways that those babies could die. They could have died of SIDS
or they could have died of all or natural causes. If she's guilty, there's only one way that those
babies could have died. And that's murder. So the probability for innocence, given the evidence,
is the probability for innocence up here, divided by the combined probability that she's innocent
and guilty. And here we use the bars differently, the probability of innocence is SIDS, divided by
the combination of the probability that those death were SIDS plus murder. What is the probability
if that is two in three? So the probability of Sally Clarke's innocence given to death of an unknown
cause is two in three, not one in 73 million.
[00:07:21] So after the big group of mathematicians and statisticians stepped in, Sally Clark was
released. But unfortunately, it was too late. She later essentially died of alcoholism. And so getting
data wrong is very easy. And getting data wrong is very, very problematic.
[00:07:42] So we've gone through four key fallacies. And if you're going to use data in a data
story, you need to double check your stories for these fallacies. The ecological fallacy. Answering
a question, using data that's actually at a different unit of analysis or level. Causal fallacy,
including or excluding variables changes the question. Simpson's paradox, answering a question
that you think is important. Rather than letting the nuances of the data show you what's
happening. And then the Prosecutors Fallacy, getting confused about the nature of conditional
probability. All of these mistakes are very easy to make. They immediately impact the ethics and
equity of your data story. So you need to either check them yourselves or get a friend or an expert
or a colleague to check your data story for you. 
